In this lesson, we'll explore how the default transactional email system that comes with WordPress
is not recommended on a production site and how easy it is to set up an SMTP service instead.
You'll learn how to select from a variety of services, from free to those with a cost and why you would
use them, as well as a selection of free SMTP WordPress plug ins to use.
We'll also look at the pricing structure of three different services, including a free one, and discuss
the merits of each.
By the end of this video, you'll understand how to set up a dedicated transactional email provider
and connected to WordPress and be able to make an educated choice about which service to use.
Let's take a look at transactional email and how it works in the first place.
And then a variety of different set ups from the default the way WordPress works, as well as some best
practices as far as setting up transactional, outgoing only email.
Now, as we've defined, transactional email is outgoing only.
And what that means is it's coming from the website itself and going to a single person.
And so here's a little diagram, an example of how this might work in the real world on a WordPress
web site.
You know, there might be a contact form or an e-commerce checkout happening where once the user submits
the form or makes a checkout, there's a submit button, of course, and the computer or the WordPress
website would then generate some outgoing emails.
So in general, two things might happen first, the the admin or you.
If you're the owner of the website, we'd get a notification, say this is a contact form, so you'll
want to know when someone fills out the contact form and you want to receive an email that states what
the contact form is about.
You know what?
What's the message?
Why is someone filling out that contact form and what is their message, their name and their email
address?
And so that is an example of a transactional email that goes out automatically to just one person after
someone fills out a form and clicks the submit button.
And then secondly, you may have a user notification or a user confirmation email that goes out as well,
depending on whether this is a contact form and e-commerce check out.
They might get a receipt, or maybe it's even an opt in form for an email newsletter or joining an email
list.
The user would get an automated email that goes out and tells them, Hey, you've joined the the newsletter?
Welcome or Hey, here's the information that you submitted in the contact form.
Or it may be a receipt like, Hey, here's the receipt for your purchase and thank you very much.
And so first, those emails go out and really, this all happens at the same time.
So I have it in this order.
First, the server receives data, you know, the server, depending on the system that you're using
the context of your contact form, the email, the e-commerce sale and the order information gets saved
in the database, of course, through your WordPress website.
And then secondly, you might get an email sent to the user and you might get an email sent to the administrator.
And so really, that's the way transactional email works.
Don't forget is outgoing only.
And it's also unrelated to send and receive email.
And so the from address that the transactional email has can really be defined as any address.
You can define the from address.
And oftentimes you can define the reply to address to let the user that receives the email.
If they do reply, what address should be reused for them to reply?
And so as we look at the WordPress default setup for outgoing email, WordPress comes with an outgoing
email system that relies on the website server and its P program and under underlying server infrastructure
and programming to be able to power outgoing email through the website.
And I have this with a Red X in the checkbox here next to, you know, the first type of setup.
This is the WordPress default.
If you install WordPress on a server, that's a live server like a shared server, for example, and
you set up a contact form and use it.
It will use the default email system, which is called Send Mail, Send Mail as a function within the
AP language, and it is basically using the same IP address that the website is using.
And it's also not a verified email or IP address as far as using the the DNS records and things like
that to make sure that this IP address here doesn't get listed as a spammers IP address and blacklisted.
And so that's the biggest reason why this is not a good way to go because you're first using the same
IP address as the website.
It's not verified or authenticated, and by default, usually you'll see a firm address as WordPress
at your domain dot com, which really usually isn't set up as a receivable.
You know, email address that can that can receive a reply.
And so I would not suggest using the default IP send mail.
The best managed WordPress hosts set up an SMTP outgoing email system for you in the background and
allow you to set up a send grid or other.
Free service to power your outgoing transactional email for you without using send mail.
The much better way to go is to use a transactional SMTP email provider alongside a plug in on your
WordPress website.
And so again, it takes a little bit more setup, but it has a lot of advantages that I've alluded to
in previous lessons.
But within this diagram, here's really how it works.
The IP address is for the website only in this case.
Again, you might have a contact form.
You might have an e-commerce receipt that needs to go out or even an opt in form.
And when people are filling out that form, they're navigating to your web site using a particular IP
address.
And when you set up a transactional email provider, which we're going to go over, some of them next,
it will use a special IP address that is only used for email and it is warmed up and protected from
being used in spam and from being blacklisted.
And so depending on the service that you use the IP addresses for email only and you can verify your
domain within their service so that your domain doesn't get blacklisted as far as a spammer.
And so there are a couple of different levels of transactional SMTP email that you can use.
SMTP stands for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, and so you need to set up both a transactional email
provider and an SMTP plug in through your WordPress website.
Each of those is for each outgoing email only for transactional emails.
And there are three ways to get this done.
There are low cost ways, and then there are very low cost ways.
Outgoing email is, you know, if it's a small number of emails, I recommend going with one of the
companies that has a free service that limits the number of emails per day that you can that you can
use, but they remain free forever.
Two of those are SendGrid and also Postmark.
Postmark has a free service that's 100 emails a day, and SendGrid has a service that's 100 emails a
day.
And when you set that up, there's only one negative.
And and really, that is well, of course, you've got 100 email per day limit, but for a small website,
it's usually plenty.
The only thing that is that with SendGrid in particular, I found that the IP address in the free level
can sometimes be compromised because there are, you know, bad actors that create a spambots that use
the free services until they get kicked off, and they compromised the IP addresses reputation.
And so SendGrid has to manage that over time.
And so the IP addresses that the free SendGrid service is using aren't always the best as far as email,
deliverability and speed.
And sometimes they can be listed on blacklists.
Now, SendGrid also has a paid service, as do these other companies spark post.
We're going to talk about Amazon simple email service in a little bit more detail.
Mail Gun Mandrill are a little more expensive.
Mandrell is the transactional email service provided by MailChimp, which you may have heard of, and
then Miller Lite is a good, good provider as well.
I've used SendGrid Amazon Spark post and I've heard a lot of good things about Postmark as well.
And so one of the things that these do is they enable you to verify your domain with the DNS records
similar to what we did with a custom hosted email address with send and receive email.
So that's only half of the setup.
The other half is that you need to set up an SMTP plug in a simple mail transfer protocol plug in for
WordPress.
There are several good ones, a longstanding one used to be called postman.
Now it's called post SMTP.
All of these work with any of these services.
WP forms SMTP is a great one.
The two that I really do recommend for one, they work with all these services.
But for another, they both work with Amazon simple email service and you'll see why in a minute is
fluent SMTP and WP Offload six as he stands for simple email service from Amazon's RWC Amazon Web Services.
And so the thing about some of most of these, all of these services, with the exception of Amazon,
they work, you know, on a on a monthly fee.
You know, you've got a monthly fee for using theirs, their paid version of their service.
And it's it's generally very low and they do provide you with the DNS records for verification and,
you know, an IP address that they.
Manage the the fluent SMTP and WP offload, six plug ins allow you to use Amazon six and Amazon six
is different in that they don't use a monthly fee for a certain number of emails per day, like in the
thousands, but they just charge you per email set at a very, very low cost.
And this is why Amazon six crosses over into broadcast or marketing email in bulk, which we'll talk
about in the next few lessons.
But to set up Amazon six takes a little bit more more effort to set up.
But in the long run, it ends up being just as secure, with managed IP addresses separate from your
website, but a lot cheaper for transactional email if you're going to pay for transactional email.
I recommend going with Amazon simple email service and use one of these two plug ins fluent SMTP or
WP Offload S6 Lite.
They have a paid version, but the Lite version is a free version that is almost as functional as the
free version now.
The fluent SMTP plug in does everything that the paid version of WP Offload does, and so that's the
one I prefer these days.
Fluent SMTP with Amazon six, it's probably the best way to go about setting up transactional email.
So let's look at a few of these services on their websites.
This is SendGrid or now called Twilio Standard because they also manage SMS texting, which is a great
service if you're going to use them for that.
SendGrid is a great company.
They do have the free plan when you click Start for free right here.
Bill, talk about, Oh, let's just talk about signing you up.
But the way they're free service works, it's not really a free trial.
You don't need to put a payment method in, but you get 100 emails per day forever.
And that's the same way Postmark works postmark at postmark apple.com.
They talk about this these these pricing levels $10 a month for $10 10000 emails per month and up from
there.
And you can have your own dedicated IP address for a fee.
That service is a lot cheaper with Amazon six as well.
But then they also talk about the free trial is not really a trial.
All new accounts start off on the free developer plan, which is really meant for testing.
Same is true of SendGrid because you get one hundred emails and not per day per month at postmark,
and that then at SendGrid.
If you look at the plans and pricing page, the free free service allows for 100 emails per day, not
per month.
And so I would recommend if you're going to go with a free transactional email provider, the SendGrid
Free Service, even though sometimes their APIs get tagged a little bit or blacklisted.
They're a great service for free postmark, a little more expensive, and it's 100 emails per month.
Now just let's take a quick look at Amazon MWC.
Amazon Web Services is generally a little more complex to setup than than other services, not just
simple email service, but a WC hosting and other services that they offer in the web space.
And there's a console that you sign into that has all of your controls.
But there are these plug ins, like I mentioned, fluent SMTP and WP offload.
Yes, that make it easier to set up transactional email through the Amazon Simple Email Service.
So if you look at the pricing page on Amazon, yes, now you do get it for free if you're hosted at
one of their more expensive hosting instances.
But if you're sending from, you know, another software package, which WordPress qualifies as that,
it's 10 cents for every thousand emails you send.
And so really, if you send 10000 emails in a month, that would only be a dollar.
And so it's quite inexpensive for transactional email.
And that's one of the reasons why it crosses over into broadcast and marketing email because you can
send a large number of outgoing emails through simple email service from Amazon very inexpensively.